Homework 3
================
10/16/2024 (Due date)

## Problem 1

**Dataset Description**

The `ny_noaa` dataset, which was uploaded from the *p8105.dataset*
package, contains 7 variables and 2595176 observations. Character
variables include weather station ID (`id`), `tmax`, and `tmin`. Integer
variables include `prcp`, `snow`, and `snwd`. There is also a `date`
variable, which is entered in YYYY-MM-DD format. After viewing the
variable types in the dataset, I converted `tmax` and `tmin` into
doubles. Using `summary()`, we get the following information:

- Precipitation (`prcp`) ranges from 0 to 22860 tenths of mm. The mean
  is 29.82 tenths of mm. 145838 entries have NA values for this
  variable.
- Snowfall (`snow`) ranges from -13 mm to 10160 mm. The mean is 5 mm.
  381221 entries have NA values for this variable.
- Snow depth (`snwd`) ranges from 0 mm to 9195 mm. The mean is 37.3 mm.
  591786 entries have NA values for this variable.
- Maximum temperature (`tmax`) ranges from -389 to 600 tenths of degrees
  C with a mean of 139.8. 1132358 entries have NA values for this
  variable.
- Mininun temperature (`tmin`) ranges from -594 to 600 tenths of degrees
  C with a mean of 30.3. 1134420 entries have NA values for this
  variable.

As you can see by looking at the number of entries with NAs for each of
the variables above, missing data is quite an issue in this dataset.

#### Task 1

In the dataset, I created 3 additional date variables by splitting
`date` into `year`, `month`, and `day`.

To ensure observations for temperature, precipitation, and snowfall are
given in reasonable units, I converted the values in `tmax` and `tmin`
to have °C as the units (instead of tenths of °C). Similarly, the unit
for precipitation (`prcp`) has been converted to just mm. Snowfall is in
reasonable units (mm).

For snowfall (`snow`), the top 3 most commonly observed values are 0mm
(77.39%, n=2008508), 25mm (1.20%, n=31022), and 13mm (0.89%, n=23095).
It may be important to note that 14.69% of the observations had NAs
(n=381221).

The relatively high percentage of empty observations for snowfall is due
to inconsistent data collection of each weather station. Some of these
weather stations may collect a portion of the variables. In general, it
makes sense that most of the observations recorded by the New York state
weather stations had 0mm for snow since the data is collected from the
time period between January 1, 1981 through December 31, 2010 and not
just during winter months.

#### Task 2

![](p8105_hw3_sjt2164_files/figure-gfm/two-panel%20plot-1.png)<!-- -->

There seem to be a few outliers in the January and July plots. For
example, in January 1982, there is a data point that is less than -10
degrees C. In January 2008, there is another outlier with an average max
temp of \< -5 degrees C. For the July plot, we see more outliers than in
the January plot. In particular, in July of 1988, there is an outlier
with an average max temperature that is less than 15 degrees C.

![](p8105_hw3_sjt2164_files/figure-gfm/geom_hex-1.png)<!-- --> Using the
function `geom_hex()`, we see that the average max temperature in July
seems to be fairly consistent among the weather stations across the
years from 1981 to 2010 with a few outliers. For the January plot, we
see more variation.

#### Task 3

![](p8105_hw3_sjt2164_files/figure-gfm/snowfall%20plot-1.png)<!-- -->
The plot on the left shows the distribution of minimum temperature and
maximum temperature for the entire dataset.

The plot on the right shows the distribution of snowfall in mm across
the years from 1981 to 2010. Outliers can be seen for snowfall greater
than 0mm.

## Problem 2

#### Task 1

*“nhanes_covar.csv”* has been uploaded as the `demo_df` dataset. Using
`summary()`, we see that there are 4 NAs for BMI and 18 NAs for
education. All 5 variables are numeric (`SEQN`, `sex`, `age`, `BMI` and
`Education`. There are 250 unique SEQNs, one for each participant.

*“nhanes_accel.csv”* has been uploaded as the `accel_df` dataset. There
are 250 SEQNs, which reflects those that are in the `demo_df` dataset.
All 1441 variables are numeric (dbl). Measurements are collected for
`min1` to `min1440`.

The two dataset are then merged into the `merged_df` dataset, which
contains all orignially observed variables. Participants less than 21
years old and those with missing demographic data (those with NAs for
BMI and education, as mentioned above) are excluded. `SEQN`, `sex`, and
`education` are converted into factors in preparation for generating
tables and plots.

#### Task 2

**Number of Men vs. Women per Education Category**

| Education              | Female | Male |
|:-----------------------|-------:|-----:|
| High school equivalent |     23 |   35 |
| Less than high school  |     28 |   27 |
| More than high school  |     59 |   56 |

- At the “High school equivalent” level, there are more males than
  females by 12 individuals.
- At the “Less than high school” level, the numbers are similar, with
  females higher by one individual.
- At the “More than high school” level, females are higher in number by
  3 individuals.

**Age Distributions for Men vs. Women per Education Category**

![](p8105_hw3_sjt2164_files/figure-gfm/age%20distribution-1.png)<!-- -->

- At the “High school equivalent” level, females have a higher age
  average when compared to males.
- At the “Less than high school” level, the average age is similar
  between male and females, with females having a slightly higher
  average age.
- At the “More than high school” level, the average age is higher in
  males when compared to females.

#### Task 3

Traditional analyses of accelerometer data focus on the total activity
over the day. Using your tidied dataset, aggregate across minutes to
create a total activity variable for each participant. Plot these total
activities (y-axis) against age (x-axis); your plot should compare men
to women and have separate panels for each education level. Include a
trend line or a smooth to illustrate differences. Comment on your plot.

#### Task 4

Accelerometer data allows the inspection activity over the course of the
day. Make a three-panel plot that shows the 24-hour activity time
courses for each education level and use color to indicate sex. Describe
in words any patterns or conclusions you can make based on this graph;
including smooth trends may help identify differences.

## Problem 3

#### Task 1

Import, clean, and tidy these data, and describe the resulting dataset.

#### Task 2

Produce a reader-friendly table showing the total number of rides in
each combination of year and month separating casual riders and Citi
Bike members. Comment on these results.

#### Task 3

Make a table showing the 5 most popular starting stations for July 2024;
include the number of rides originating from these stations.

#### Task 4

Make a plot to investigate the effects of day of the week, month, and
year on median ride duration. This plot can include one or more panels,
but should facilitate comparison across all variables of interest.
Comment on your observations from this plot.

#### Task 5

There were relatively few electric Citi Bikes in 2020, but many more are
available now. For data in 2024, make a figure that shows the impact of
month, membership status, and bike type on the distribution of ride
duration. Comment on your results.
